north of Los Angeles Times festival of
books held every year on the campus of
UCLA the book TV bus has made this one
of it stops as it goes nationwide inside
the bus today we have nick schou he is
the author of this book kill the
messenger how the CIA's crack cocaine
controversy destroyed journalist Gary
Webb when did you meet Gary Webb
actually only met Gary once when he was
doing a book tour 1998 at a bookstore in
Santa Monica but I had actually gotten
to know him sort of over the phone as a
reporter because a member the drug ring
that he wrote about was an ax Orange
County cop and I cover law enforcement
in Orange County so actually wrote
several follow-ups about his
investigative work before I ever met him
what is what was the crux of the
investigative work that got so much
attention well Gary you know wasn't the
first reporter that it actually probed
this whole issue of drugs that were
coming into the United States in the
1980s a lot of stories have been written
about that at the time and even john
kerry when he was a senator had had held
hearings i'm trying to get to the bottom
of that issue but the media basically
kind of ignored the store in in some
cases even ridiculed Kerry and Gary
found out 10 years later where a lot of
these drugs that were alleged to have
come in during this Iran Contra era had
ended up and connected them to the
biggest crack dealer in LA history
Freeway Ricky Ross and because Ross was
already kind of a celebrity drug figure
with LA Times had labeled the kingpin of
crack cocaine his series received a lot
of attention especially in the black
community and it was a for a while at
least a huge sensation he was on the
television and radio every day a couple
of months after his story came out the
major newspapers which would pretty much
ignored that story up until it reached a
real fever kind of pitch began printing
stories attacking his work and claiming
that there was no evidence that the CIA
had any involvement with this drug ring
or had anything to do with the bringing
drugs into the country you write that
his editors betrayed him how well I Gary
was a very aggressive reporter
according to the people that work with
them throughout his career and they felt
that Gary worked best as all good
investigative reporters do when they
have a relationship with their editor
where they have someone that can
actually be as passionate about the
stories then but also kind of like
restrain the reporter to the certain
extent that will protect the story from
going further than the facts now Gary is
reporting as I found actually was
accurate in fact after he'd already been
attacked and discredited the CIA
acknowledged that it had covered up its
relationship with drug traffickers
during the 1980s and only admitted this
after Gary had already lost his job but
the story you know had some very
inflammatory language in that in the
lead paragraph and ran on the internet
the first major news story to run
simultaneously online with the logo
showing someone smoking crack
superimposed over the seal the CIA so a
lot of my book kind of focuses on this
story kind of got out of Gary's hands a
little bit and how because he had
editors that were only sort of too eager
to hype the the facts that he had
created such a firestorm of outrage that
ultimately made it easier for the papers
to criticize his work bike by actually
debunking the false notion that the CIA
deliberately started the crack cocaine
epidemic which Gary Webb never believed
which I guess to a certain extent the
story it implied through its kind of
inflammatory lead sense what um what was
going on in his life at that time well
Gary had risen to the top of his field
when he published Dark Alliance he'd
been a reporter for 20 years and he
clearly had every reason to think that
this was the story that was going to
really kind of make him one of the most
famous and successful investigative
reporters and for a while that's what he
was he was one for the San Jose Mercury
News and after the criticism started
coming in at first his paper defended
him but then they basically backed off
the story and printed a half retraction
half kind of Mayock hope acknowledging
that they shouldn't have implied that
the CIA knew about this activity when
they couldn't really prove it and carry
predicted accurately that this was going
to be viewed as a complete retraction
which it wasn't actually
and and he protested this and became
very vocal and criticizing his editors
for for actually printing this
retraction and at that point he was
essentially forced out of the paper and
left journalism shortly thereafter his
life basically became kind of downhill
after that when did you first start
writing about him are looking at it well
I read the story when it came out and I
was amazed that the din 1986 after four
years of dealing drugs this drug ring
had basically been the focus of a big
multi-agency law enforcement rate in LA
and one most of the places that were
rated were in south central or East LA
where most of the drugs were found but
one of the places that was rated was a
mansion in Mission Viejo where a former
Orange County cop told the police
officers that he worked for the CIA and
it turned out that this comp was a money
launderer for the drug ring he was
providing weapons to gang members that
were involved in the drug ring as well
as police scanners that enabled them to
know when the police were zeroing in on
their drug stashes so I spent several
years actually investigating that one
cop filing Freedom of Information Act
request and getting records from the FBI
and CIA most of which were censored but
which revealed that in fact he did have
a business relationship with the former
chief of covert operations for the CIA
so it's my conclusion that in fact if
the rest of the papers that had spent so
much energy sort of attacking the story
and attacking the conspiracy theories
that were sort of floating around it if
they'd actually put any resources into
really tracking down the evidence that
Gary had not quite been able to achieve
with his reporting who knows what
ultimately would have been proven
correct who are you writing for I was
running for OC weekly which is an
independent that's where I still work
it's an alternative weekly in Orange
County California it's a sister paper to
the village voice in LA Weekly LA Weekly
also read my stories as did the San
Francisco Bay Guardian when did you
decide to change the focus and look at
him and not the story well I mean I kept
in touch with Gary until shortly before
he died in december two thousand four
and i was very saddened when i learned
read in the newspaper that he committed
suicide and the obituary either ran in
the LA Times was very I felt dismissive
and the Delhi times had never even
covered the the CIA report that admitted
for the first time they had worked with
drug dealers and in fact this obituaries
was to me sort of insulting and I felt
that somebody needed to really write an
accurate biography that really portrayed
Gary Webb and the tragedy of his life
and also tried to answer some of the
questions that have been kind of ignored
in the scandal he spent a lot of time
with his family yeah I would not have
probably been able to have written this
book or wanted to have written this book
without the cooperation is family
because I felt that Gary but as much as
the story was kind of misunderstood by
people who sort of used it for their own
and you know Gary was also very
misunderstood and I I didn't in fact
know him that well I mostly knew him on
a professional basis but after he had
left journalism and wrote his book he
was still being criticized as sort of a
conspiracy theorist by people that were
reviewing his book and I found out that
in fact this guy had always gone after
corruption and abuses of power
regardless of a democrat or republican
affiliation he was kind of a equal
opportunity muckraking journalist and
many of the people that he worked with
now are at the paper's like the New York
Times and and and these people all
remember Gary's actually like the model
of what they wish more reporters would
be like a really hard hitting
investigative journalist that actually
got results actually exposed corruption
and you know I think that this book is
kind of a cautionary tale for people
that are you know considering careers an
investigative reporting because it
provides an insight account of how this
story went so wrong but it's also sort
of begs the question of whether our
country would be better off if we had
more reporters like Gary Webb who you
know weren't afraid to take on very
powerful institutions what did he do
wrong well Gary you know it's not so
much what he did wrong is what he
what wasn't there to assist him in
getting the story out and what he didn't
have were reporters or rather editors
that were basically he thrived at the
mercury news but also before that at the
Kentucky post and the Cleveland Plain
Dealer where he had very tough editors
that basically just sort of made sure
that the headlines especially the
headlines didn't go overboard he had
been sued a couple of times at the
Cleveland Plain Dealer but the
settlements that the papers ultimately
signed were over misleading headlines
and ultimately what I found out what
Dark Alliance was the facts were there
it's just that the headline and this
sort of the lead paragraphs the kind of
things were rewritten over and over and
over in the process of getting this
story out in which Gary ultimately
doesn't entirely have control over
that's what caused the sort of
misleading reaction eating the editors
were changing the actual text his story
was rewritten so many times and went
from a four part series to a three part
series back to a four-part back to a
three part where at the end of the day
he didn't even know what version was
going to go into the paper because he
was on vacation when it altima tlie came
out and you know he deserves all
reporters you know have to take
ownership for anything that appears
under their name there's no question
about that but with he was the only
person that suffered any consequences as
a result of the store and ultimately
paid a very heavy price but the editors
that basically in one case the managing
editor that made sure that nobody else
at the paper really knew about this
project and wanted it to be his sort of
he thought that this was going to be a
few lets her story and that he would get
glory out of it he stopped reading the
story halfway through because he had
applied for a corporate job and was no
longer really paying any attention to
the story at all so I actually among
other people I interviewed Leo Wolinsky
the managing editor the LA Times it was
responsible for their criticism of dark
lines and he told me in retrospect that
Gary got way too much of the blame in
this whole scandal that other other
editors that were promoted who didn't do
a good job editing that story deserve at
least as much criticism as Gary God and
they carried it exactly what you should
expect from a great investigative
reporter he was trying to get the story
out in the LA Times ironically probably
would have printed the story themselves
but they as Leo Wolinsky put it might
better job editing what happened after
he left the paper and what led to the
suicide well it's it's a pretty
complicated story when you're examining
a suicide of anybody I mean there's a
lot of different factors that play into
it but basically all the people that I
interviewed that knew Gary Wow felt that
this story was pretty much the central
event in his life and that after his
after his story exploded in his face and
he lost his career in journalism that's
when he started experiencing major
problems with depression is depression
lasted for years he went through divorce
and ultimately and committed suicide
shortly after having to put his house on
the market and he was about to move in
with his mother he was 50 years old and
the only paper that would Hiram was a
small turn ative weekly paper he had
just been recently laid off by a state
government agency in Sacramento and
wanted to get back into journalism it's
my feeling if he had been a little bit
less depressed and more hopeful he might
have been able to get a better job but
as it was the job that he had didn't pay
the bills and he just reached the end of
his rope what did what do you hope
people will get from this book well I
mean I I I think it's interesting
because few people that are familiar
with Gary Webb and with the Dark
Alliance story don't already have their
mind made up about it one way or the
other the either feel that it's complete
nonsense and that Gary Webb was a
terrible reporter or they feel that Gary
was a hero and you know he was unfairly
criticized and possibly even
assassinated by the CIA which you know
was a major part of the reason why I
wanted to write this book basically set
the record straight about this guy that
found him to be a fascinating reporter
fascinating human being and his career
spanning a few decades in journalism he
worked at some very interesting papers
with some very interesting people and
the totality of his life i think is
really a tribute to the best you know
aspirations of investigative reporting
what was some what was the most
interesting response you've gotten from
it so far well it's hard to say I one
person who I won't mention because he
hasn't publicly criticized the book felt
that I was far too sympathetic to people
that had criticized Gary's reporting
when it counted
and I made a very deliberate effort to
talk to everybody that knew Gary and had
anything to say about him including
people that work with them at the
mercury news that thought that he was a
kind of a hot shot or a hothead reporter
more sympathetic towards him but I also
interviewed all the critics that
published articles critical of Gary's
work who would speak with me so the book
is as objective as I could make it and
it's as fair to everybody who is willing
to share their views on it as I could
possibly make it because I think that
that only strengthens the the ultimate
conclusion of the book what where are
the editors today well one of them works
for an environmental organization in New
York City left journalism as Jerry
suppose who was the editor of the paper
at the time recently retired and is
living on a vineyard in Northern
California and the dreaded early was
working hardest with them but who was
also supervising several other stories
and fifty reporters are all together is
teaching at Stanford University did any
of them talk to you for this book well
actually Don Garcia was with the night
fellowship at Stanford did and she was
the only reported that worked with Gary
that actually acknowledged her own
mistakes and her own feeling that she
had wished that there'd been a better
process with the editing but I talked to
a lot of people that the mercury news
but the other editor is above her that I
feel were really ultimately responsible
for the problems with the store we're
the only people actually the wouldn't
talk to me nick schou is the author of
this book kill the messenger have the
CIA's crack cocaine controversy
destroyed journalist Gary Webb thank you
for your time thank you